One in particular is the accounting cycle. The accounting cycle is an invaluable workflow map that formalizes the process of recording, classifying and summarizing a business’ financial transactions across a fiscal year. 
The accounting cycle is a continual workflow, and a bookkeeper follows each of the steps as they happen across the year rather than doing them all at once. This further ensures accuracy since transactions are less likely to be forgotten or recorded incorrectly from memory. 


1. Identify business transactions
Identifying your business’ transactions is the first step. Only include transactions that are directly related to your company’s financial activities.

These transactions can include activities like expenses, purchases, revenue and debt payoff. Any influx or outflux of money to or from your company will likely count as a transaction. 


Why is the Accounting Cycle Important?

While it seems like a ton of record keeping, adhering to an accounting cycle is crucial for businesses.

Efficiency — Having a formalized process and tools for financial record keeping ensures that bookkeepers have a clear roadmap to follow when recording information, which streamlines the process and makes it less prone to error

Internal analysis — The reports that can be generated at the end of an accounting cycle give precious insight into a business’ performance, both within a period and between accounting periods. These insights allow companies to locate which processes and practices are the most profitable.

Time management — Bookkeepers and accountants have an easier time planning their schedules across a period when a formalized accounting cycle is in place since they know ahead of time what responsibilities they’ll be handling.

Compliance — Strict financial record keeping is a necessity in staying compliant with government regulations and taxes. Businesses must disclose their financial records then calculate and pay their taxes. Even well-intentioned businesses can do this incorrectly, leading to government audits and potential fines. 